---
title: Our trip down to Oxford 
categories: [travel, architecture]
date: 2024-05-01
summary: The end of April so us on a long road trip down to Oxford to meet up with Hazel's friends from university
---

The end of April so us on a long road trip down to Oxford to meet up with Hazel's friends from university - not that she went to Oxford, you understand (she went to the University of London), but it was a central place to meet up. We decided to make a week of it, so here is the story, in pictures. It reminds me of what a lovely country we actually live in , with amazing buildings and monuments, and equally amazing volunteers who look after these (especially in the National Trust - I salute you and the work you do!) For a change, I have put all the buildings in age order, rather than the order of our travels - these are the details

1. Old Rufford Hall, near Ormskirk, Lancashire: The oldest building in the series, this was built by the Hesketh family in 1530, so Tudor style and modernised with a new Jacobean wing in brick in 1662. Hesketh, as in motorbikes and as in the Formula One team that Hunt the Shunt drove for. In the care of the National Trust and with lots of lovely volunteers caring for it. Grade 1 Listed by Historic England – the highest level possible.

2. Wallington Hall near Morpeth, Northumberland: Ninety years on from Jacobean, we have gone all Pallian. 1750-ish by Daniel Garrett for the Blackett family. Another beautiful National Trust property, and again Grade 1 listed. I have drawn the Coach House, which all visitors pass through. Wallington Hall is currently appearing on TV in a programme with Matt Baker about tenant farmers.

3. Nostell Priory near Wakefield, West Yorkshire: Moving on 20 years from Wallington, this is the National Trust’s Nostell Priory. We are in 1775ish, in a house full of elegant Robert Adam interiors and just stuffed with Chippendale furniture of every type and description – not just the odd dining chair, but desks, library steps, wardrobes, beds, the lot. Rather than the main house I have drawn Adam’s Riding House, with flanking greenhouse and garden house, viewed from the lovely walled garden. Once again, a Grade 1 listing.

4. Preston Mill, East Linton, East Lothian, Scotland: I couldn’t resist drawing this lovely little Hobbit House. In fact this is a kiln for drying oats before passing to the Mill next door. It all dates from the 18th Century and it all still works through power from the waterwheel. This being Scotland, it is Grade A Listed, and in a peaceful little spot. Thank you again to the National Trust for Scotland volunteers who do the tours and look after the place.

5. Rolfe Street Baths, Black Country Museum, Dudley: Well, we have moved on 100 years through to 1888 and the Rolfe Street Baths. Originally in Smethwick, this complex house a series of ‘slipper’ baths and laundry facilities when few homes had their own, plus two swimming pools. In 1989 it was taken down and moved brick by number brick to the Black Country Museum in Dudley, where the former pools now serve as exhibition and conference space. It’s proper Victoria Gothic by Martin & Harris of Birmingham. Presumably not listed because it’s not on it’s original site. The Black Country Museum of Living History (bit of a mouthful) is well worth a visit.

6. Tecton Buildings at Dudley Zoo: We have moved on to the 20th Century, and next door to the Museum. Tecton were the great modernist architects who did the Penguin Pool at London Zoo. In 1937 they were invited to do pretty much the whole of the new zoo at Dudley, in the steep grounds of the Castle. Their aim was a zoo without cages, which they pretty much achieved. There are 12 Tecton buildings left at Dudley (a couple of them, like the Penguin Pool, have been demolished, and perhaps a couple should go now), but some of the others are fab. Restoration is underway – currently the Bear Ravine is being sorted out, but it will not be a home for bears. I generally don’t like zoos, but if you are going to have a zoo, this seems as nice and humane as you can get. All the Tecton Buildings are Grade 2 Listed building, this is a drawing of the café.   

7. St Chad’s Church, Wood End, Coventry: The Scottish architect Sir Basil Spence did the best Modernist Cathedral ever in Coventry, opened in 1962. But his ideas didn’t arrive out of thin air. In the fifties he had tried out many of his ideas in three local churches beforehand. All three are now Grade 2 Listed. At St Chad’s he tried out the idea of fully glazing the end wall of the church (an idea that became the John Hutton West Wall in the Cathedral). Wood End is a tough place. The glass at St Chad’s has understandably been replaced by an opaque fibreglass, but the concept is clearly there and the rest of it is still good.

8. Blackwell’s Music Store, Oxford: Finally we have made it to Oxford, we are up to date, and my last drawing of the set. It’s 1970. This is the former Blackwell’s Music Store, part of Wadham College, where the same architects did the library. It’s Grade 2 Listed, and by my favourite Scottish architects Gillespie, Kidd & Coia of Glasgow.